Neal Marquez  
Soc 510  
Week 5: Network Theory  

Network theory provides both the context and sets of tools needed in order to understand both how relationships manifest themselves in a group as well as the subsequent consequences of those relationships. While the theoretical underpinnings has it roots in the works of Georg Simmel, Erickson writes on the contemporary contentions in the field and two distinct diverging branches of the field in formalism and relationalism. I really enjoyed the distinction between these two schools of thought because of the differential focus that they take. While seemingly studying the same concepts, Erickson’s differentiation of relations and relationships highlights the different scope of the two branches as well as indirectly commenting on the wide range of topics that network theory is equipped to address. Specifically her nod to the importance of having temporal network data along with characteristics of individual actors lends itself well to being able to tease apart at the very least the temporal sequence of relations being formed and the and the consequences or antecedents. 

In addition, this weeks readings presented us a toolkit by which to study characteristics beyond the individual without being part of the macro. Specifically, Katherine Stovel, Lynette Shaw and Ronald Burt presented the role of a social broker, whose position is one that connects groups of individuals who normally would not have interaction. Burts arguments are reinforced by some degree with anecdotal evidence, but the bulk of the paper builds off a study examining  managers from a corporate organization. While the attractiveness of this data was obvious, corporations tend to have better than average record keeping and have an incentive to study improving the efficiency of their organizational structure, it was difficult to see the utility of the brokerage theory applying to areas outside of corporate settings. Furthermore, the temporality of the events that occurred in the setting was not well defined and it was unclear of those who were in the role of the broker were truly at higher risk of having a good idea, or rather had found success earlier in their career and now were either placed in roles where they were in contact with a greater amount of loosely connected individuals. The weakness of having a single snapshot of a network structure seemed apparent here as having more data on previous network structures and individuals placements would have shed light on this matter.

Stovel and Shaw presented a more wide range of examples by which brokerage may happen and highlight that the motivations of a broker may be different depending on the context. This is in contrast to Burt who implied that brokers are self positioned entrepreneurial individuals. One of the more import aspects of the brokerage process that they brought to light was the focus on the bias of an individual. Though brokers may be bringing two groups together, their allegiance may be stronger with one group over another and the incentives for which they broker will likely be different. 

